# WE 2024-12-13

This is the first status report and thus lays a groundwork to which all future reports will reference. They are perhaps an evolution of my running logs from the last 2 years, whom fallen into disuse for a number of reasons - primarily the scale of the tasks I am working on does not provide me with succinct points in which to report progress.

We will begin by observing the progress made on the problem thus far. The problem as it currently stands is how to correctly decompose our complex chromatospectral images into their composite components. We demonstrated that decomposition was possible on 2024-08-24 but the last 4 months have seen a decrease in time spent on the project. Also, time was needed to understand (and much more time is required) the mechanics of working with tensors, the PARAFAC2 model, etc. Finally, much time was spent working on data models for the input tensors and their decompositions. I developed a normalised RDBMS model which, while effective, became too cumbersome to maintain and continue to integrate into the developmental process - but was perhaps a good prototype of tools to come. A key development was a revisit to `xarray` on 2024-12-03, and after an effort to understand the model and how to subset, it was found that it is superior to a RDBMS system, again at least during prototyping. This sparked new efforts to solve the problem, now that we had confidence in a core data model. After adding a pytest-integrated method of automating testing of notebooks, which enabled the upkeep of notebooks with shared dependencies (a constant thorn in the side of this kind of work), we have in the last two weeks managed to develop a central data model containing the input signal and the results of its deconstruction, a backbone for further development.

### Partitioning

There has been key progress in the automted partition, or peak picking within an input dataset. This is important as PARAFAC2 is iteratively based, and is thus slow. Reducing the input to as few peaks as possible will optimize the speed of overall decomposition. This has been a problem for a very long time, that seems close to solving. The technique relies on the classic scipy find_peaks algorithm to detect as many peaks as possible, then Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering to find clusters along the signal. Efforts in this direction have however stalled primarily because clustering by maxima will obviously cut the bounding peaks in half as only the maxima is considered, and the second problem is that if two or more signals within a given dataset are severely misaligned (in this case even half a peak width left or right) then that signals maxima is the other signals minima, resulting in imperfect partitioning. It is important that peaks are clustered correctly, as otherwise the results are nonsensical. As it is easy enough to imagine a scenario where one signal is half a peak out of sync with another throughout the entire length,there is no obvious solution to this problem that doesn't include DTW or hoping that there is a gap between peak clusters sufficiently wide in both signals providing a common clustering bound. Progress from here could follow one of three routes, and possibly all. To solve the peak bisection problem we need to consider peak widths, and decide how to shrink or stretch the cluster bounds so that clusters begin and end on peak extrema, or better yet equidistant between two peaks. This will likely require a bias left or right, i.e. if the last peak in cluster 1 extends in width through cluster 2, and the first peak in cluster 2 extends back into cluster 1, then we need to choose whether to extend cluster 1 at the cost of cluster 2, or vice versa. One solution to misstep could be to factor in peak spectra similarity, say through a correlation matrix. Clustering could consider peak similarity, ensuring that peaks similar above some threshold are in the same cluster. The third of course is to eliminate the most misaligned sample.

### Rank Estimation

Rank estimation has been another avenue of interest, but also one that has thus far provided low yield. We've tried CORCONDIA in Python, however implementations are lacking, and thus we started experimenting with matlab, which required learning how to use it, and of course because its tied to my university account, how to use Octave, the free version. Regardless of the implementation used, CORCONDIA provided very poor results, indicating that the dataset was exceedingly non-trilinear. Truthfully this is not suprising considering that one of the problems we are trying to solve is alignment. This indicates to me that CORCONDIA is inappropriate for rank estimation of PARAFAC2 models. There are other methods to explore, including split-leaf analysis and APTERA, however I have not researched the former, and the latter is only implemented in MATLAB, and I am yet to work on how to translate my dataset into matlab correctly.

The failure to estimate rank automatically pushed me towards a brute force approach, simply iterating through an appropriate rank range and observing the resulting decomposition. This worked moderately well however the decompsitions were far from perfect and included multi-peak components and negative peaks. Furthermore I accidentally deleted the notebook, and it will need to be recreated.

### Understanding the PARAFAC2 Model

It is complicated, and as it is generalized to many forms of data, hard to comprehend from a chromato-spectral perspective. The literature is unclear, and frankly it appears that many authors are purposefully obsfucating their results, either to hide their ignorance, protect their monopoly or failures. Much work has to be done on developing an understanding, primarily non-negative constraints on modes to ensure a correct modelling.

### From Here

So from here, we have to achieve the following:


- peak clustering
     - writeup on peak clustering
     - solve peak splitting problem
     - solve misalignment problem

- re-establish brute force PARAFAC2 notebook

- send subset to bro

- establish rank estimation solution

- PARAFAC2 writeup.

This has been added to the [project_parafac2](../projects/project_parafac2.ipynb) TODO.